feat: Add LW5 Community Day Blogpost. (#8522)
supabase/supabase: apps/www/_blog/2022-08-19-postgrest-v10.mdx

---
title: 'PostgREST v10: EXPLAIN and Improved Relationship Detection'
description: "Today, PostgREST 10 was released. Let's take a look at some of the new features that go hand in hand with supabase-js v2."
author: steve_chavez
image: lw5/postgrest-v10.png
thumb: lw5/postgrest-v10.png
tags:
  - launch-week
date: '2022-08-19T07:02:00'
toc_depth: 3
---

> PostgREST turns your PostgreSQL database automatically into a RESTful API. Today, PostgREST v10 was [released](https://github.com/PostgREST/postgrest/releases/tag/v10.0.0). v10 is not available on the Supabase Platform yet, but it is available for [self-hosting](https://supabase.com/docs/guides/hosting/overview) or as a [executable binary](https://github.com/PostgREST/postgrest/releases/tag/v10.0.0).

Reviewer: Reducing links
```suggestion
PostgREST turns your PostgreSQL database automatically into a RESTful API. Today, PostgREST v10 was [released](https://github.com/PostgREST/postgrest/releases/tag/v10.0.0). v10 is not available on the Supabase Platform yet, but it is available for [self-hosting](https://supabase.com/docs/guides/hosting/overview) or as a executable binary from the GitHub release page.
```

Let's take a look at some of its new features that go hand in hand with [supabase-js v2](https://supabase.com/blog/supabase-js-v2).

## EXPLAIN

Akin to the [PostgreSQL EXPLAIN](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/sql-explain.html) command, you can now get the execution plan of a request through REST or `supabase-js`. This works transparently for reads, writes and RPC because every request to PostgREST generates a single SQL query.

This is only suitable for development environments and is only enabled when the `db-plan-enabled` config is set to `true`.

> ### Getting the execution plan through REST

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Getting the execution plan through HTTP
```

> The execution plan can be obtained by using a vendor media type on the `Accept` header.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using `curl`, we can obtain the execution plan by using a vendored media type on the `Accept` header.
```

```bash
$ curl -H 'Accept: application/vnd.pgrst.plan' \
       'https://<project>.supabase.co/clients?select=*&id=eq.1'

Aggregate  (cost=8.18..8.20 rows=1 width=112)
  ->  Index Scan using clients_pkey on clients  (cost=0.15..8.17 rows=1 width=36)
        Index Cond: (id = 1)
```

The `text` format is used by default, which gives you the same output you’d get in other SQL clients like `psql`. You can change the format to JSON by using a media type suffix `application/vnd.pgrst.plan+json`.

### Explaining supabase-js queries

> For `supabase-js`, you can get the execution plan using the `explain()` method. This works for every `supabase-js` method, including `rpc()`. Here’s an example for `select()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For `supabase-js`, you can get the execution plan using the `explain()` transform. This works for every `supabase-js` method, including `rpc()`. Here’s an example for `select()`.
```

```jsx

> const { data, error } = await supabase.from('projects').select('*').eq('id', 1).explain()

Reviewer: More readable
```suggestion
const { data, error } = await supabase
  .from('projects')
  .select('*')
  .eq('id', 1)
  .explain()
```

---
title: 'PostgREST v10: EXPLAIN and Improved Relationship Detection'
description: "Today, PostgREST 10 was released. Let's take a look at some of the new features that go hand in hand with supabase-js v2."
author: steve_chavez
image: lw5/postgrest-v10.png
thumb: lw5/postgrest-v10.png
tags:
  - launch-week
date: '2022-08-19T07:02:00'
toc_depth: 3
---

PostgREST turns your PostgreSQL database automatically into a RESTful API. Today, PostgREST v10 was [released](https://github.com/PostgREST/postgrest/releases/tag/v10.0.0). v10 is not available on the Supabase Platform yet, but it is available for [self-hosting](https://supabase.com/docs/guides/hosting/overview) or as a executable binary from the GitHub release page.

Let's take a look at some of its new features that go hand in hand with [supabase-js v2](https://supabase.com/blog/supabase-js-v2).

## EXPLAIN

> Akin to the [PostgreSQL EXPLAIN](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/sql-explain.html) command, you can now get the execution plan of a request through REST or `supabase-js`. This works transparently for reads, writes and RPC because every request to PostgREST generates a single SQL query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Akin to the [PostgreSQL EXPLAIN](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/sql-explain.html) command, you can now get the execution plan of a request through HTTP or `supabase-js`. This works transparently for reads, writes and RPC because every request to PostgREST generates a single SQL query.
```

This is only suitable for development environments and is only enabled when the `db-plan-enabled` config is set to `true`.

### Getting the execution plan through HTTP

> Using `curl`, we can obtain the execution plan by using a vendored media type on the `Accept` header.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using `curl`, you can obtain the execution plan by using a vendored media type on the `Accept` header.
```

> Using `curl`, you can obtain the execution plan by using a vendored media type on the `Accept` header.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using `curl`, you can obtain the execution plan by using a vendor media type on the `Accept` header.
```

```jsx
const { data, error } = await supabase
  .from('projects')
  .select('*')
  .eq('id', 1)
  .explain()

console.log(data)
```

```text hideCopy
Aggregate  (cost=8.18..8.20 rows=1 width=112)
  ->  Index Scan using projects_pkey on projects  (cost=0.15..8.17 rows=1 width=40)
        Index Cond: (id = 1)
```

Explaining the plan output in detail is beyond the scope of this blog post but basically it’s a tree of operations that PostgreSQL will follow for executing a query. Here we see the “Aggregate” node which corresponds to the `json_agg` function used by the PostgREST generated query(more details on how to find these later) and the “Index Scan” node which means an index on “id” was used for a fast search.

### Explaining RLS policies

The raison d'etre of `explain()` is to provide quicker feedback on the performance of queries, especially in the presence of RLS policies. For instance, let’s say we have this basic policy:

```sql
create policy "anon can't read"
on projects for select to anon
using (
  false
);
```

> And we use `explain()` again, this time using the `analyze` option(actually executes the query, same as the EXPLAIN ANALYZE counterpart in SQL) so we can see the execution time of the query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And we use `explain()` again, this time with the `analyze` option(executes the query, same as the EXPLAIN ANALYZE counterpart in SQL) so we can see the execution time.
```
